---
layout: post
title: "Sermon: Mark 11:1–12:12"
---

*March 2026*

Below are notes for a sermon of mine on Mark 11:1–12:12.

---

# A blessing and a curse | Mark 11:1–12:12

## Jesus' arrival is a blessing for the faithful

There's a prophecy in the Bible about Jesus arriving at the temple and bringing about salvation for those who are faithful and destruction for those who are fruitless. I'm not talking about an Old Testament prophecy about Jesus' arrival in Mark 11; I'm talking about a New Testament prophecy about Jesus' second coming. It's in Revelation:

***"There before me was a great multitude that no one could count, from every nation, tribe, people and language ... holding palm branches in their hands."* — Revelation 7:9**

Christians believe Jesus is returning to his people, to his temple, the church. It could happen any time—we don't know when. We don't know exactly how it will happen—we just believe it will happen, because Jesus promised he would return. But as we study Jesus' arrival to Jerusalem in Mark's gospel, I'd love us to have in mind the arrival we anticipate in Jesus' second coming.

***If Jesus returned tonight, would you consider it a blessing or a curse?***

It depends, doesn't it? It depends on if you're ready—it depends on if you've lived as a faithful, fruitful follower of Jesus.

Jonothan Edwards was a puritan in the 18th Century whose preaching lit up the world and caused many people to come to Christ. In his late teens and early twenties he wrote a list of resolutions that he would live by for the rest of his life. One of those resolutions reads as follows:

***"Resolved never to do anything I would be afraid to do if I knew the last trumpet would sound within the hour."* – Jonathan Edwards, Resolution 19.**

How would your life change if you lived with a constant awareness of Jesus' arrival—if you expected Jesus to arrive within the hour, what would you be doing with your life now?

Those who were faithful to God in the time of Jesus anticipated the arrival of a king. The prophets throughout the Old Testament had predicted a Messiah, a Christ, a chosen king to arrive to Jerusalem to save Israel from destruction.

Zechariah prophesied this when he said:

***“Shout, Daughter Jerusalem! See, your king comes to you, righteous and victorious, lowly and riding on a donkey.”* — Zechariah 9:9**

We get the donkey image here wrong much of the time. We think it somehow strange that the king should ride on a donkey. We think of Eeyore from Winnie the Pooh or Donkey from Shrek and think these are not fit for a king. In reality, in the ancient world, the donkey was a symbol of royalty.

In the Old Testament, the kings had donkeys. King David rode a donkey (2 Sam 13:29), Solomon rides a donkey to his anointing as king (1 Kings 1:33). Jesus is aligning himself with these exalted kings as he rides into Jeruslem. A horse represents going to battle; a donkey represents a king who has won a battle and arrives to announce victory and peace.

This is why the crowds shout:

***“Blessed is the coming kingdom of our father David!”* — Mark 11:10**

 What the crowds don't know yet is that the kingdom Jesus brings is not quite like the kingdom from David's time. Jesus' kingdom will branch out into the whole world. His enemies are not the Greeks or the Romans, but they are spiritual enemies: sin and death. And instead of conquering Goliath with sling and stone like king David, Jesus will win peace for his people by going to Golgotha, taking on himself all that causes hostility between people and God—he's going to die for the sins of the world. He rides in like a king but he knows in a few days he will die like a criminal. He rides in on the back of a donkey but he knows that in a few days time he'll walk out of Jerusalem with a cross on his back.

Let me ask you this: if you knew Jesus was returning tonight, would you welcome him like this? Would you count it a blessing, or an inconvenience?

## Jesus arrives and curses the fruitless

Jesus' arrival is a blessing for God's people, and part of the way Jesus blesses God's people is by overturning fruitless, fake temple worship.

But not before he curses a fig tree. He sees a fig tree in leaf, goes to see if it has any fruit, and finds none. Then he says to the tree:

***“May no one ever eat fruit from you again.”* – Mark 11:13–14**

Now this is a weird story—Jesus curses a tree. But nothing in the way Mark writes his gospel is by accident. Mark is very intentional about the stories he puts together. If you ever think something you are reading in Mark's gospel is strange, it could be that what you're reading serves as a living parable for something that's about to happen next.

Let me give you one example—we read about the blind man whom Jesus healed by spitting and rubbing mud in his eye. The man could see, but his vision was still blurred—he could see people but they looked like trees. It took a second go to give him clear vision. This story came right before the story of the apostle Peter who had this moment of clarity: he recognised Jesus as the messiah. And yet his vision of Jesus was still a bit blurred because he did not understand Jesus' mission to die on the cross. It took longer for him to get clearer vision.

In our passage, Jesus curses a fig tree, which is weird. Why curse a fig tree? Because it wasn't bearing fruit! Now we can make excuses for the tree—apparently it wasn't even the season for fruit. Did you notice that in verse 13?

There's often a pattern in parables that says, "If this example is true, how much more is the reality true!" Jesus once told a parable about prayer where he said if imperfect human fathers know how to give good gifts to their children, how much more will God give good things to those who ask him.

Similarly, if Jesus curses a tree for not bearing fruit when it is not in season, how much more will he curse a tree for not bearing fruit when it is in season. How much more will he curse the fruitless, faithless, fakers in the temple when they have been given every opportunity by God to bear the fruit of proper worship to Him!

The temple was instituted by God, built by people filled with God's spirit, managed by God's people, preserved by God's sovereign grace over centuries of turmoil. It was supposed to be a place of hope; a place of reverence. It was supposed to be a place where vulnerable people could come and pray to God; instead it became a place where evil people preyed on the vulnerable. Notice what Jesus does:

***"Jesus entered the temple courts and began driving out those who were buying and selling there. He overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves."* — Mark 11:15.**

Jesus is angry, but his anger is totally justified. This is righteous anger. What is he angry about? Is it simply that there are things for sale amongst the people of God? If Jesus came to our church would he tear down our church bookstall?

I don't think so. Notice who is singled out in the temple: those extorting others for profit—money changers and those selling doves.

What's wrong with money changers? They were people who would let foreigners exchange their currency for local currency to purchase things in the temple. It's an opportunity to rip people off, and they take it.

The people at the currency exchange booth at the airport are people motivated not by mercy and helping the poor but by money and profit. There's an opportunity for money to be made, and they take it. In Mark 11, the religious elite are doing it in the temple of God.

What's wrong with those selling doves? In the Old Testament law, it says that you should sacrifice particular animals in the temple, but for the poorest of the poor who couldn't afford lambs or bulls or goats, they could sacrifice a small, cheap animal—doves. But people saw this as a money-making opportunity to rip off the poor.

I see people in my area walking around collecting cans and bottles in the streets, presumably to redeem them for 10 cents each. What would you think of me if I starting a business going around picking up all the cans I could and selling them to the poor for 9 cents each? I get 9 cents, they get 1 cent, I rip them off. You would think me an evil person out for profit. Now I don't know how these dove-sellers got their doves, but I imagine they went around with cages collecting them in the streets. It was an evil business. And it's happening right in the temple of God.

It's incredible how these things can go unchallenged. You hear stories of people today pretending to be ministers of the gospel luring vulnerable people with very little social connection and very little cash, and convincing them to give them the last of what they have. This stuff still happens today and it makes God angry. The apostle Peter says "darkest darkness is reserved for them". (2 Peter 2:17).

The temple looked from afar like a place devoted to God; but up close it was a place devoted to selfish gain.

The Bible goes on to say that after Jesus' resurrection, whoever believes in Him is like a temple—they have access to God and they themselves are the dwelling place of God, the Holy Spirit.

The challenge for us, then, is to examine our own lives and ask—do our external acts of worship reflect what's going on inside us? Whose glory are we motivated in our lives—ours or God's? Whose gain do we seek?

If Jesus walked alongside you for a week, what things in your life would he turn upside down? Often I think one area of my life Jesus would turn upside down is prayer. I don't often pray as one with full faith that God can do more than we ask for. I need Jesus to help me pray; I trust we all do.

What Jesus does is he shows that true worship and true prayer is not bound to a temple—true worship can happen wherever there is true faith. It can happen by yourself in your room as you pray to God, it can happen when we sing praises in someone's backyard, it can happen anywhere where there are people who trust God.

This is Jesus' point to Peter. Peter is shocked that Jesus' prayer worked—he cursed the fig tree and it withered. And what does Jesus say to him?

***“Have faith in God,” Jesus answered.* – Mark 11:22**

God honours true faith wherever it is found—you can pray big prayers expecting God to answer, and He will. But note, Jesus is not saying that you can pray for a million dollars and expect it in your bank account by the end of the week—the important thing Jesus is stressing is that true faith is powerful. The prayer of faith is effective. How effective? It can move mountains.

At the same time, the true prayer of faith always has in mind the will of God, and so is always ready for God to answer "no". Jesus prays a huge prayer in the garden of Gethsemane. In faith he asks, "take this cup from me," but he adds, "not my will, but yours father be done." He pours himself out in prayer and entrusts the answer to God.

How is your prayer life? When was the last time you prayer a big prayer? How is your faith?

## Jesus' opponents question his status as king

Those who live for self know that Jesus is a threat to their autonomy, and those who opose Jesus often cloak their fear in objections. The religious elite of Jesus' day do this. They ask:

***“By what authority are you doing these things?”* – Mark 11:28**

What right does Jesus have to come to Jerusalem and act like the king? Now, we might not have ever asked that particular question before. But the question behind the question is one we ask deep in our souls everytime we have to weigh up following Jesus or ignoring him. And that question is: ***What right does Jesus have to rule my life?***

Maybe you've asked this question yourself. Jesus claims to be king, and you think to yourself—what right does Jesus have? This is my life. It's my body. It's my money. It's my time. It's my success. It's my friends. It's my family. It's my dreams. It's mine.

Jesus says, "it's not yours, it's all mine". What right does Jesus have to do that? Have you ever felt that?

Jesus responds by asking them a question: ***"John’s baptism—was it from heaven, or of human origin? Tell me!"* (Mark 11:30)**.

At the beginning of Jesus' ministry he was baptised by John the baptist and God's voice sounded from heaven and said that Jesus was His beloved son. People saw it and heard it, and recognised it as being from God. They recognised John as a true prophet of God.

If it is true that Jesus is God's son and He is God—then that settles the issue of whether it's his right to rule my life. If he created my life, if he sustains my life, then yes—my life belongs to him.

But Jesus' opponents don't really care about the answer, and they don't really care what God thinks; they only care about what people think. They're too afraid to denounce John the Baptist publicly, so they don't answer the question. So Jesus doesn't answer theirs either.

## Jesus questions his opponents' place in the kingdom

Instead, Jesus tells a parable, a story which raises a question about whether or not Jesus' opponents belong in God's kingdom at all.

It's the story of the owner of a vineyard who hires workers to produce fruit for the owner. The owner sends servants to the tenants to get some of the fruit. Instead, they beat up and kill the servants.

Those God had set up amongst His people and His temple to bear the fruit of proper worship had long rebelled against Him. God sent prophets—Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, John the Baptist, and others—to warn them and to help them bear fruit for God. When you read the New Testament the first command given is by John the Baptist, who says "bear fruit in keeping with repentance" (Matthew 3:8).

Instead, the religious elite killed John as they had killed many of the other prophets before him.

The owner of the vineyard, having sent servants, now chooses to send his son, in the hopes that the people would listen to him. But what did they do?

***"they took him and killed him and threw him out of the vineyard."* (Mark 12:8)**.

You might think Jesus has been harsh with his words and actions as he speaks to people in Mark 11. Keep in mind, as he says this parable, he is speaking to the very people who will kill him in only a few days. He knows it. And yet instead of lashing out at them, he is patient with them and tells them this parable, where he is the son whom they will kill outside the Jerusalem gates.

And if it is true that Jesus is God's son, and if it is true that they killed him, the question the enemies of God must reckon with is this:

***"What then will the owner of the vineyard do?"* (Mark 12:9)**.

The real question we must ask is: if we reject the owner of life, what are the consequences?

The consequences are utterly dire.

Jesus will return one day.

***"Every eye will see him, even those who pierced him."* (Revelation 1:7)**

Might we be people when Jesus returns who have not forsaken the love we had at first. Might we be people who are not lukewarm in our faith but fired up for Jesus and his kingdom. Might we be people who don't just have the reputation of being alive but are actually alive.

