---
layout: post
title: "Mark 11:1–12:12"
---

*March 2026*

Below are notes for a sermon of mine on Mark 11:1–12:12.

---

11.1–7. This ties to a prophecy, "your king is coming to you; righteous and having salvation is he, humble and mounted on a donkey, on a colt, the foal of a donkey." (Zechariah 9:9). It's possible we get the image here wrong much of the time. We think the donkey is what makes him lowly; we imagine him riding ee-or from Winnie the Pooh. In reality, the donkey is a symbol of strength. The rich had donkeys (Judges 5:10), King David rode a donkey (2 Sam 13:29), Solomon rides a donkey to his anointing as king (1 Kings 1:33). Jesus is aligning himself with these exalted kings as he rides into Jeruslem. The shock of Zechariah 9:9 is that this king would be "lowly". Jesus has the crowds buzzing for him—in what sense is he lowly? He's lowly because though he rides into Jerusalm on the back of a donkey, he knows that in a few days time he'll be walked out of Jerusalem with a cross on his back.


11.8-10. This is a beautiful scene until one realises what is to follow. The same lips that praise Jesus later shout "Crucify him! Crucify him!"


11:12–20. Nothing about Mark's gospel is lazy or unintentional. The way Mark pieces the narrative together is important. We see this in the story of the blind man whose vision becomes blury before it becomes clear, right before Peter's spiritual vision goes from dark to blury in his acknowledgement of Jesus as Messiah; clarity was yet to come. In this section, the fig tree doesn't bear the fruit Jesus wanted it to, and so it was accursed; the temple was not bearing the fruit God wanted it to, and so it would be accursed; we see this continuation in chapter 13.



