---
layout: post
title: "Youth group talk: Acts 8:26–40'"
---

*March 2026*

This post was written as a youth group talk on Acts 8:26–40.

---

# Jesus is good news for everyone

## How can a total outsider come to God?

Have you ever felt distant from God? There are lots of reasons you might feel this way.

One reason is the smallness and seeming insignificance of our planet.

Another is that we are flesh and blood human beings. Why should God care particularly about us? Why are we special?

Another is that bad stuff happens in the world—why does God let suffering happen? Has he abandoned us?

Another is because we do bad stuff—we disobey God; the Bible calls that sin. Why would God care about me given the suffering I cause others, and given my apathy towards him?

All this makes us wonder: does God really care about me?

Now let's assume for a second that there is a God who cares about you and me. If God wanted to, he could demonstrate His care and concern for us. He could show us He loves us. The claim of the Bible is that God has done exactly that—God came into the world in the person of Jesus, lived among us, died for us, and rose back to life a few days later to prove Himself and prove His love for us. All of this proves that there is a God who cares about us—yes, you and me—despite our smallness, our suffering, and our sin. And the gospel of Jesus—the good news about Jesus—has been spreading all over the world since Jesus. The gospel has been unstoppable.

The book of Acts tells the story of how the gospel started spreading after Jesus's resurrection.

In our section of Acts which we read tonight, we see a story that shows that the gospel is for anyone—even people who are total outsiders. In our passage we see one a Christian named Philip share the gospel with someone who probably felt like a massive outsider. Philip is on a journey to spread the gospel and this is what it says:

***So he started out, and on his way he met an Ethiopian eunuch, an important official ... This man had gone to Jerusalem to worship.* (Acts 8:27).**

This Ethiopian man doesn't know Jesus but He knows about God through the Old Testament (the writings which came before Jesus).

He had gone to Jerusalem to worship God. Why? Well, we know that Jerusalem was the place where people thought God wanted to be worshipped. But we can only guess why *this man* went to Jerusalem to worship. My guess is that it started with a feeling of distance from God. You see, this man had heard there was a God who had done amazing things in Israel, in Jerusalem, and wanted to go and worship that God. The problem was, he was an Ethiopian—he lived far from Jerusalem. He was an outsider racially and geographically. It would have taken a few months on chariot to reach the temple in Jerusalem. Another issue was that he was a eunuch, which meant that he was unable to have children, which in some cultures is viewed as a barrier to blessing. He was a social outsider.

So he probably went to Jerusalem because he heard there was an opportunity to come close to God, to worship God fully. You see, there's a book in the Old Testament called Isaiah, written hundreds of years before Jesus, which talks about a day when God will bring peace and blessing to the nations, and when anyone can come to worship God, and it even makes special mention that eunuchs will one day be able to worship God like everyone else. And the way that anyone can come and worship him is because God is going to send a servant who will open up the way to worshipping him.

So he goes to Jerusalem to worship God. But there was a problem: in the temple in those days if you were not a Jew you could not enter the inner-most places; you could only enter the outer courts. So this man was a real outsider. He probably left sad and frustrated.

On his long journey home he is reading that book (probably re-reading it) trying to figure out what he missed.

## Jesus came to welcome outsiders in

One of Jesus' disciples, Philip, hears this man reading Isaiah as he goes along in his chariot. It says:

***Then Philip ran up to the chariot and heard the man reading Isaiah the prophet. “Do you understand what you are reading?” Philip asked. “How can I,” he said, “unless someone explains it to me?” So he invited Philip to come up and sit with him.* (Acts 8:30–31).**

I always find this a funny scene. I don't know if you've ever tried to hold a conversation with someone who is riding in a chariot, but I imagine it's a similar feeling as trying to speak to someone who's on a bus and you're running alongside them. It's a bit awkward, but Philip doesn't care. He knows the gospel is unstoppable, and so he doesn't let any social barriers stop him from sharing it with this man.

There's a few lessons here about sharing your faith with others—what we call evangelism: 1) good evangelism is bold even in the face of social barriers, 2) good evangelism often begins by asking questions ("Do you understand? ... What do you think about? ... How do you feel about?"), 3) good evangelism focuses on what the Bible says.

He climbs up in the chariot and they read the passage from Isaiah together. This is the passage:

***He was led like a sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb before its shearer is silent, so he did not open his mouth. In his humiliation he was deprived of justice. Who can speak of his descendants? For his life was taken from the earth.* (Acts 8:32–33, quoting Isaiah 53:7–8)**.

What's the passage he's wrestling with? It's all about somebody who served God and others by being willing to become like an outsider and to be mistreated. It's about someone who was like a lamb who willingly went to the slaughter. It's about someone who was humiliated and didn't get justice. It's about a man who didn't have descendants, didn't have children. It's about a man whose life was taken away from him.

In the book of Isaiah it's talking about someone who became an outsider and went through all this injustice so that people could worship God and enter into a relationship with Him.

Now, who do you think these verses are talking about? (Wait for responses).

If you said "Jesus", well done, you win. But how do you know it's Jesus? You see, nobody is born with an understanding of the Bible and God and Jesus. You know it's Jesus because other people have helped you understand the Bible over your life.

Maybe you're here and you didn't know these verses are talking about Jesus. If that's you, you're in good company—the Ethiopian didn't know either. Look at what Philip does for the Ethiopian:

***Then Philip began with that very passage of Scripture and told him the good news about Jesus.* (Acts 8:35)**.

Now, you don't have Philip hear to tell you the good news of Jesus, but you do have another Philip.

The passage from Isaiah is about Jesus. Jesus was like a sheep led to the slaughter, and he did not fight back. He was humiliated, deprived of justice, cut off frrom the land of the living. He did all this so that anyone—including you—can be close to God. Jesus endured injustice so that we could get grace.

Why did Jesus need to die? God created everyone including you and me with a purpose: to love God and to live by His words.

But ever since the beginning, people have rejected God and gone our own way. We disobey God and live for ourselves. We tend to care more about what God gives us rather than God himself. I sin against God anytime I put something else first in my life; when I care about my life, my fun, my money, my experiences, my career, my success, my popularity, my grades, at the expense of caring about God.

This is a crime against God. Every crime carries a penalty—the penalty for the crime of turning our backs on God is death and seperation from God.

Jesus came and took that penalty for us. Jesus is the only human who ever lived the right way. He never disobeyed God. And yet, Jesus took what we deserve and he gives us as a gift that which only He deserves. He swaps places with us.

Jesus died for our sin. He demonstrated his power to forgive sin by rising from the dead. He appeared to many people—their lives were changed because they put their trust in Jesus and began to believe that death is not the end of the story. They began to follow Jesus as their king—their king who died for them.

## Now anyone can come to God

The Bible says if Jesus is your Lord and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.

In the end, the penalty that you deserve will not be put on you. Instead, you'll get grace. Grace means an ill-deserved gift. It's not just an undeserved gift, like if I give you a gift even though I don't know you. It's an ill-deserved gift, like if you had committed some crime against me but I chose to repay you with a gift of kindness.

God treats us as we don't deserve—he gives us eternal life even though we deserve death. We access this gift by faith—trusing in Jesus. This gift lasts forever—death is not the end. There is life beyond death, because Jesus lived on beyond death.

How do you become a Christian? You put your trust in Jesus. And you begin to try to obey Jesus.

If you have doubts about God, you are still welcome.

If you have sin, you are welcome.

If you don't know much about God at all, you are welcome.

If you haven't been coming to Salt or church or anything much, you are welcome.

The man feels so welcome that he is keen to do something which shows he's in.

One early step in obeying Jesus is participating in an activity that Jesus commanded his disciples to do—to be baptised. Baptism is when you are dipped in water, and what it symbolises is being united to Jesus.

You go down into the water to symbolise being united to Jesus in his death. As you come up out of the water it symbolises us being united to Jesus in his resurrection. It's something you should do if you've become a Christian.

Philip baptised the Ethiopian eunuch:

***Then both Philip and the eunuch went down into the water and Philip baptized him.* (Acts 8:38).**

What is baptism? It's an outward sign of something that happens inwardly. We are united to Jesus in his death and resurrection, and we experience new life with God. It's a symbol of God's power to save—even the outsider!


# NOTES







